# JP's Essay

In January 1956, the British artist, explorer, and environmentalist Margaret Mee (1909–1988) undertook a dangerous journey deep into the Amazon. Her goal was to document rare Amazonian plants in their natural habitats. This trip would be the first of many for Mee, who carried out a total of fifteen expeditions between 1956 and 1988. Her 1957 orchid painting of Stanhopea graveolens in the Dumbarton Oaks Rare Book Collection is just one example of the many rare and beautiful plant portraits Mee painted.

But just as orchids often do, Mee’s elegant painting carries an air of mystery. Does the painting really depict the Stanhopea graveolens species? And how did orchids like this transform from rare flowers—accessible only after journeying over a thousand miles through inhospitable environments—into popular houseplants you can purchase at your local supermarket?

Most epiphytic orchids, like the Stanhopea, grow in tropical or subtropical environments. While Europeans were familiar with terrestrial orchids native to their temperate climates, in the nineteenth century they became obsessed with the larger, brighter, and rarer orchids from the tropics. As European colonialism expanded, more and more captivating orchids emerged from South America and Southeast Asia.

Orchid fever began in the early 1800s, quickly infecting the British elite. It allegedly started when English explorer and naturalist William John Swainson used what he thought were worthless weeds as packing material to ship exotic tropical plants from Brazil to England. When the shipment arrived, however, Swainson’s weeds had bloomed into bright purple flowers. He had unknowingly packed his shipment in epiphytic orchids (in particular Cattleya labiate), which do not require soil to grow and are found only in tropical climates. This seemingly magical and brightly colored plant immediately enthralled those who saw it. While there are many versions of this story, we do know that an orchid specimen later named Cattleya labiate was sent by Swainson to William Cattley, a British trader and orchid enthusiast, sometime after Swainson returned from Brazil.
